JUDY WOODRUFF: The Nobel Peace
Prize laureate Liu Xiaobo died
yesterday in China of liver
cancer after years behind
bars for his efforts to
democratize his homeland.
Liu's work and his
plight brought him global
attention, work that enraged
the Chinese government.
His death brought an
outpouring of tributes.
William Brangham has this look
at Liu Xiaobo's life and legacy.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: From Hong
Kong to Sydney and around the
world, there have been vigils
overnight and today.
John Kamm runs a human rights
organization based in San
Francisco that advocates for
political prisoners in China.
JOHN KAMM, The Dui
Hua Foundation: A
great loss for China.
Someone who was committed to
nonviolent change is gone.
And it's a great
loss for the world.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: He'd been
released from prison on medical
leave only a few weeks earlier,
but supporters say he
was denied proper care.
WU'ER KAIXI, Exiled
Chinese dissident:
The Chinese government
brutally killed my teacher
and one of the most
genuine and conscientious
Chinese in the world.
I would like to ask the world,
world leaders and people around
the world, which side are
you on?
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: President
Trump praised Liu in a
statement yesterday, calling him
a poet, scholar, and
courageous advocate.
China's government flatly
denies Liu was mistreated,
and, today, a spokesman
condemned the international
criticisms.
GENG SHUANG, Chinese Foreign
Ministry Spokesperson
(through translator):
Those statements are
interference to China's
judicial sovereignty
and domestic affairs.
Liu Xiaobo is a criminal who was
put on trial by China's laws.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: For decades,
Liu was one of the Chinese
government's most outspoken
critics.
He rose to prominence during the
1989 Tiananmen Square protests,
returning from the U.S. to
support the original
student demonstrators.
After troops opened fire killing
hundreds, perhaps thousands,
Liu helped negotiate safe
passage for the survivors.
He remained in China
despite detention and
constant surveillance and
continued his political
advocacy.
In 2008, he helped author
Charter 08, a manifesto
demanding political
and civil reform, and
he was sentenced to 11 years
in prison for subversion.
JOHN KAMM: Ten thousand
people signed that petition.
He is the only one to have
been sentenced to prison.
So, I think he
sacrificed there, too.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: But the
case gained international
attention, and, in 2010,
over China's vehement
objections, Liu was awarded
the Nobel Peace Prize.
Stuck in prison, Liu was unable
to attend the Nobel ceremony,
so a chair was left empty
in Oslo.
And a statement he had
written for his trial was
used as his Nobel lecture.
"Hatred can rot a person's
wisdom and conscience," it said.
Still, Beijing's hard line on
Liu makes clear that the reforms
he sought for decades appear
increasingly out of reach.
JOHN KAMM: There's a
major party meeting
coming up in a few months.
The government and its president
and Chairman Xi Jinping will
be inclined to be very, very
tough.
In terms of changing
China's political system,
I don't see it, I'm afraid.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The
focus turns now to
Liu's wife, Liu Xia.
She remains under house arrest.
And calls for her release,
including from the
secretary of state, have
so far gone unheeded.
For the "PBS NewsHour,"
I'm William Brangham.